Wayang
Wayang,     also known as wajang (Javanese: ꦮꦪꦁ ,
                                                                                    Wayang
romanized: wayang), is a traditional form of puppet theatre play
originating from the Indonesian island of Java.[1][2][3] Wayang
refers to the entire dramatic show. Sometimes the leather
puppet itself is referred to as wayang.[4] Performances of
wayang puppet theatre are accompanied by a gamelan
orchestra in Java, and by gender wayang in Bali. The
dramatic stories depict mythologies, such as episodes from the
Hindu epics the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, as well as
local adaptations of cultural legends.[2][5][6] Traditionally, a
wayang is played out in a ritualized midnight-to-dawn show
by a dalang, an artist and spiritual leader; people watch the
show from both sides of the screen.[2][5]                           Types             Traditional puppet
                                                                                      theatre
Wayang performances are still very popular among
                                                                    Ancestor arts     Javanese people
Indonesians, especially in the islands of Java and Bali.
Wayang performances are usually held at certain rituals,            Originating       Indonesia
certain ceremonies, certain events, and even tourist attractions.   culture
In ritual contexts, puppet shows are used for prayer rituals        Originating era   Hindu - Buddhist
(held in temples in Bali),[7] ruwatan ritual (cleansing Sukerto                       civilisations
children from bad luck),[8] and sedekah bumi ritual
(thanksgiving to God for the abundant crops).[9] In the context
                                                                       Wayang Puppet Theatre
of ceremonies, usually it is used to celebrate mantenan
(Javanese wedding ceremony) and sunatan (circumcision                   UNESCO Intangible Cultural
ceremony). In events, it is used to celebrate Independence                     Heritage
Day, the anniversaries of municipalities and companies,
birthdays, commemorating certain days, and many more.
Even in the modern era with the development of tourism
activities, wayang puppet shows are used as cultural tourism
attractions.[10]

Wayang is one of the peaks of Indonesian culture, which is the
most prominent among many other cultures. Wayang
traditions include acting, singing, music, drama, literature,
painting, sculpture, carving, and symbolic arts. The traditions,
which have continued to develop over more than a thousand              Wayang kulit performance by the
years, are also a medium for information, preaching,
                                                                       famous Indonesian dalang (puppet
education, philosophical understanding, and entertainment.[11]
                                                                    master) Manteb Soedharsono, with the
UNESCO designated wayang – the flat leather shadow                  story "Gathutkaca Winisuda", in Bentara
puppet (wayang kulit), the flat wooden puppet (wayang klitik),       Budaya Jakarta, Indonesia, on 31 July
and the three-dimensional wooden puppet (wayang golek)                               2010
theatre, as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage
of Humanity on 7 November 2003. In return for the                  Country      Indonesia
acknowledgment, UNESCO required Indonesians to preserve
                                                                   Criteria     Performing arts, Traditional
the tradition.[12]
                                                                                craftsmanship
                                                                   Reference    063 (https://ich.unesco.org/
Etymology                                                                       en/RL/wayang-puppet-thea
                                                                                tre-00063)
The term wayang is the Javanese word for 'shadow'[3][13] or
'imagination'. The word's equivalent in Indonesian is bayang.      Region       Asia and the Pacific
In modern daily Javanese and Indonesian vocabulary, wayang                    Inscription history
can refer to the puppet itself or the whole puppet theatre
                                                                   Inscription 2008 (3rd session)
performance.
                                                                   List         Representative List

History
Wayang is the traditional puppet theatre of Indonesia.[14][2][5]
It is an ancient form of storytelling known for its elaborate
puppets and complex musical styles.[15] The earliest evidence
of wayang comes from medieval-era texts and archeological             Wayang Kulit (the leather shadow
sites dating from late 1st millennium CE. There are four           puppet), Wayang Klithik (the flat wooden
theories concerning where wayang originated (indigenous to           puppet), Wayang Golek (the three-
Java; Java–India; India; and China), but of these, two are              dimensional wooden puppet)
more favored: Java and India.

Regardless of its origins, states Brandon, wayang developed and matured into a Javanese phenomenon.
There is no true contemporary puppet shadow artwork in either China or India that has the sophistication,
depth, and creativity expressed in wayang in Java, Indonesia.[16]


Indigenous origin in Java

According to academic James R. Brandon, the puppets of wayang are native to Java. He states wayang is
closely related to Javanese social culture and religious life, and presents parallel developments from ancient
Indonesian culture, such as gamelan, the monetary system, metric forms, batik, astronomy, wet rice field
agriculture, and government administration. He asserts that wayang was not derived from any other type of
shadow puppetry of mainland Asia, but was an indigenous creation of the Javanese. Indian puppets differ
from wayang, and all wayang technical terms are Javanese, not Sanskrit. Similarly, some of the other
technical terms used in the wayang kulit found in Java and Bali are based on local languages, even when
the play overlaps with Buddhist or Hindu mythologies.[16]

G. A. J. Hazeu also says that wayang came from Java. The puppet structure, puppeteering techniques, and
storytelling voices, language, and expressions are all composed according to old traditions. The technical
design, the style, and the composition of the Javanese plays grew from the worship of ancestors.

Kats argues that the technical terms come from Java and that wayang was born without the help of India.
Before the 9th century, it belonged to the Javanese. It was closely related to religious practices, such as
incense and night / wandering spirits. Panakawan uses a Javanese name, different from the Indian heroes.
Kruyt argues that wayang originated from shamanism, and makes comparisons with ancient archipelago
ceremonial forms which aim to contact the spirit world by presenting religious poetry praising the greatness
of the soul.


Origin in India

Hinduism and Buddhism arrived on the Indonesian islands in
the early centuries of the 1st millennium, and along with
theology, the peoples of Indonesia and Indian subcontinent
exchanged culture, architecture, and traded goods.[16][17][6]
Puppet arts and dramatic plays have been documented in
ancient Indian texts, dated to the last centuries of the 1st
millennium BCE and the early centuries of the Common
Era.[18] Further, the eastern coastal region of India (Andhra
Pradesh, Odisha, and Tamil Nadu), which most interacted
with Indonesian islands, has had traditions of intricate,
leather-based puppet arts called tholu bommalata,
tholpavakoothu, and rabana chhaya, which share many                Blencong, a Javanese oil lamp in the form
elements with wayang.[2][19]                                       of the mythical Garuda bird for wayang kulit
                                                                   performances, before 1924
Some characters such as the Vidusaka in Sanskrit drama and
Semar in wayang are very similar. Indian mythologies and
characters from the Hindu epics feature in many major wayang plays, which suggests possible Indian
origins, or at least an influence in the pre-Islamic period of Indonesian history.[16] Jivan Pani states that
wayang developed from two art forms from Odisha in eastern India: the Ravana Chhaya puppet theatre and
the Chhau dance.[20]


Records

The oldest known record concerning wayang is from the 9th century. Old Javanese (Kawi) inscriptions
called Jaha Inscriptions, dating from around 840 CE and issued by Maharaja Sri Lokapala from the
Mataram Kingdom in Central Java, mention three sorts of performers: atapukan (lit. 'mask dance show'),
aringgit (lit. 'wayang puppet show'), and abanwal / abanol (lit. 'joke art'). Ringgit is described in an 11th-
century Javanese poem as a leather shadow figure.

In 903 CE, the Mantyasih inscription (Balitung charter) was created by King Balitung of the Sanjaya
dynasty of the Ancient Mataram Kingdom. They state, "Si Galigi Mawayang Buat Hyang Macarita
Bimma Ya Kumara", which means 'Galigi held a puppet show for gods by taking the story of Bima
Kumara'.[21] It seems certain features of traditional puppet theatre have survived from that time. Galigi was
an itinerant performer who was requested to perform for a special royal occasion. At that event he
performed a story about the hero Bhima from the Mahabharata.




Palm leaves manuscript of kakawin Arjunawiwaha is written by Mpu Kanwa in 1035 CE
Mpu Kanwa, the poet of Airlangga's court of the Kahuripan kingdom, writes in 1035 CE in his kakawin
(narrative poem) Arjunawiwaha, "santoṣâhĕlĕtan kĕlir sira sakêng sang hyang Jagatkāraṇa", which
means, "He is steadfast and just a wayang screen away from the 'Mover of the World'." As kĕlir is the
Javanese word for the wayang screen, the verse eloquently comparing actual life to a wayang performance
where the almighty Jagatkāraṇa (the mover of the world) as the ultimate dalang (puppet master) is just a
thin screen away from mortals. This reference to wayang as shadow plays suggested that wayang
performance was already familiar in Airlangga's court and wayang tradition had been established in Java,
perhaps even earlier. An inscription from this period also mentions some occupations as awayang and
aringgit.[22]

Wayang kulit is a unique form of theatre employing light and shadow. The puppets are crafted from buffalo
hide and mounted on bamboo sticks. When held up behind a piece of white cloth, with an electric bulb or
an oil lamp as the light source, shadows are cast on the screen. The plays are typically based on romantic
tales and religious legends, especially adaptations of the classic Indian epics, the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana. Some of the plays are also based on local stories like Panji tales.[23]

                      Wayang puppet theatre performances in Indonesia
Wayang kulit performance with gamelan
accompaniment in the context of the
appointment     of    the     throne for
Hamengkubuwono VIII's fifteen years in
Yogyakarta, between 1900 and 1940




A dalang (puppeteer) in a wayang golek
(wooden puppet) performance, between 1880
and 1910
                            Wayang Beber performance of the desa
                            Gelaran at the home of Dr. Wahidin
                            Soedirohoesodo at Yogyakarta; in the middle
                            Dr. GAJ Hazeu, Dutch East Indies, in 1902



Art form

Wayang kulit

Wayang kulit are without a doubt the best known of
the Indonesian wayang. Kulit means 'skin', and refers
to the leather construction of the puppets that are
carefully chiselled with fine tools, supported with
carefully shaped buffalo horn handles and control
rods, and painted in beautiful hues, including gold.
The stories are usually drawn from the Hindu epics the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata.[24]

There is a family of characters in Javanese wayang
called punokawan; they are sometimes referred to as           A dalang (puppet master) depicting a fight in a
"clown-servants" because they normally are associated         wayang kulit performance
with the story's hero, and provide humorous and
philosophical interludes. Semar is actually the god of
love, who has consented to live on earth to help humans. He has three sons: Gareng (the eldest), Petruk (the
middle), and Bagong (the youngest). These characters did not originate in the Hindu epics, but were added
later.[25] They provide something akin to a political cabaret, dealing with gossip and contemporary affairs.

The puppet figures themselves vary from place to place. In Central Java, the city of Surakarta (Solo) and
city of Yogyakarta have the best-known wayang traditions, and the most commonly imitated style of
puppets. Regional styles of shadow puppets can also be found in Temanggung, West Java, Banyumas,
Cirebon, Semarang, and East Java. Bali's wayang are more compact and naturalistic figures, and Lombok
has figures representing real people. Often modern-world objects as bicycles, automobiles, airplanes and
ships will be added for comic effect, but for the most part the traditional puppet designs have changed little
in the last 300 years.
Historically, the performance consisted of shadows
cast by an oil lamp onto a cotton screen. Today, the
source of light used in wayang performance in Java is
most often a halogen electric light, while Bali still uses
the traditional firelight. Some modern forms of wayang
such as wayang sandosa (from Bahasa Indonesia,
since it uses the national language of Indonesian
instead of Javanese) created in the Art Academy at
Surakarta (STSI) employ theatrical spotlights, colored
lights, contemporary music, and other innovations.

Making a wayang kulit figure that is suitable for a
performance involves hand work that takes several
                                                             There are three main components of wayang kulit
weeks, with the artists working together in groups.
                                                             shows including dalang, gamelan (music and
They start from master models (typically on paper)
                                                             sindhen), and wayang kulit itself
which are traced out onto skin or parchment, providing
the figures with an outline and with indications of any
holes that will need to be cut (such as for the mouth or
eyes). The figures are then smoothed, usually with a
glass bottle, and primed. The structure is inspected and
eventually the details are worked through. A further
smoothing follows before individual painting, which is
undertaken by yet another craftsman.

Finally, the movable parts (upper arms, lower arms
with hands and the associated sticks for manipulation)
mounted on the body, which has a central staff by
which it is held. A crew makes up to ten figures at a
time, typically completing that number over the course       A wayang kulit (leather shadow puppet)
of a week. However, there is not strong continuing           performance using kelir (thin fabric) as a border
demand for the top skills of wayang craftspersons and        between the puppeteer (dalang) who plays the
the relatively few experts still skilled at the art          puppets and the audience
sometimes find it difficult to earn a satisfactory
income.[26]

The painting of less expensive puppets is handled expediently with a spray technique, using templates, and
with a different person handling each color. Less expensive puppets, often sold to children during
performances, are sometimes made on cardboard instead of leather.

                Some examples of wayang kulit figures (leather shadow puppet)
Kumbakarna,      Tropenmuseum   collection,
Indonesia, before 1914




Gatot Kaca, Tropenmuseum        collection,
Indonesia, before 1914




Wibisana,      Tropenmuseum     collection,
Indonesia, before 1933
               Princess Shinta, Tropenmuseum collection,
               Indonesia, before 1983




               Yudhishthira,    Tropenmuseum   collection,
               Indonesia, before 1914




               Princess Tari, Tropenmuseum     collection,
               Indonesia, before 1934



Wayang golek
                                                             ᮚᮀ
                                                    Wayang golek (Sundanese: ᮝᮚᮀ ᮍᮧᮜᮦᮊ᮪) are three-
                                                    dimensional wooden rod puppets that are operated
                                                    from below by a wooden rod that runs through the
                                                    body to the head, and by sticks connected to the
                                                    hands. The construction of the puppets contributes to
                                                    their versatility, expressiveness and aptitude for
                                                    imitating human dance. wayang golek is mainly
                                                    associated with the Sundanese culture of West Java. In
                                                    Central Java, the wooden wayang is also known as
                                                    wayang menak, which originated from Kudus, Central
                                                    Java.

                                                     Little is known for certain about the history of wayang
Wayang golek performance (3D wooden puppet),
                                                     golek, but scholars have speculated that it most likely
Indonesia
                                                     originated in China and arrived in Java sometime in
                                                     the 17th century. Some of the oldest traditions of
wayang golek are from the north coast of Java in what is called the Pasisir region. This is home to some of
the oldest Muslim kingdoms in Java and it is likely that the wayang golek grew in popularity through telling
the wayang menak stories of Amir Hamza, the uncle of Muhammad. These stories are still widely
performed in Kabumen, Tegal, and Jepara as wayang golek menak, and in Cirebon, wayang golek cepak.
Legends about the origins of the wayang golek attribute their invention to the Muslim saint Wali Sunan
Kudus, who used the medium to proselytize Muslim values.

In the 18th century, the tradition moved into the mountainous region of Priangan, West Java, where it
eventually was used to tell stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in a tradition now called wayang
golek purwa, which can be found in Bandung, Bogor and Jakarta. The adoption of Javanese Mataram
kejawen culture by Sundanese aristocrats was probably the remnant of Mataram influence over the
Priangan region during the expansive reign of Sultan Agung. While the main characters from the
Ramayana and Mahabharata are similar to wayang kulit purwa versions from Central Java, some
punakawan (servants or jesters) were rendered in Sundanese names and characteristics, such as Cepot or
Astrajingga as Bagong, and Dawala or Udel as Petruk. Wayang golek purwa has become the most popular
form of wayang golek today.

                Some examples of wayang golek figures (3D wooden puppet)
Cepot, a Sundanese Punokawan, Indonesia




Rahwana, Indonesia in 2004




Ramawijaya, Indonesia in 2004
                Gatot kaca, Indonesia in 2015




                Kumbakarna, Indonesia before 1976




                Dewi Drupadi, Indonesia before 1976



Wayang klitik
Wayang klitik or wayang karucil figures occupy a middle ground between the figures of wayang golek and
wayang kulit. They are constructed similarly to wayang kulit figures, but from thin pieces of wood instead
of leather, and, like wayang kulit figures, are used as shadow puppets. A further similarity is that they are
the same smaller size as wayang kulit figures. However, wood is more subject to breakage than leather.
During battle scenes, wayang klitik figures often sustain considerable damage, much to the amusement of
the public, but in a country in which before 1970 there were no adequate glues available, breakage
generally meant an expensive, newly made figure. On this basis the wayang klitik figures, which are to
appear in plays where they have to endure battle scenes, have leather arms. The name of these figures is
onomotopaeic, from the sound klitik-klitik that these figures make when worked by the dalang.

Wayang klitik figures come originally from eastern Java, where one still finds workshops turning them out.
They are less costly to produce than wayang kulit figures.

The origin of the stories involved in these puppet plays comes from the kingdoms of eastern Java: Jenggala,
Kediri and Majapahit. From Jenggala and Kediri come the stories of Raden Panji and Cindelaras, which
tells of the adventures of a pair of village youngsters with their fighting cocks. The Damarwulan presents
the stories of a hero from Majapahit. Damarwulan is a clever chap, who with courage, aptitude, intelligence
and the assistance of his young lover Anjasmara makes a surprise attack on the neighboring kingdom and
brings down Minakjinggo, an Adipati (viceroy) of Blambangan and mighty enemy of Majapahit's beautiful
queen Sri Ratu Kencanawungu. As a reward, Damarwulan is married to Kencanawungu and becomes king
of Majapahit; he also takes Lady Anjasmara as a second wife. This story is full of love affairs and battles
and is very popular with the public. The dalang is liable to incorporate the latest local gossip and quarrels
and work them into the play as comedy.

                Some examples of wayang klithik figures (flat wooden puppet)
Menak Jingga, Tropenmuseum collection,
Indonesia, before 1953




Damar Wulan, Tropenmuseum collection,
Indonesia, before 1933




Demon, Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia,
before 1950
               Figure of Batara Guru




               Duryudhana,     Tropenmuseum   collection,
               Indonesia, before 1986




               Brathasena,     Tropenmuseum   collection,
               Indonesia, before 1986



Wayang beber
Wayang beber relies on scroll-painted presentations of the stories being told.[27] Wayang beber has strong
similarities to narratives in the form of illustrated ballads that were common at annual fairs in medieval and
early modern Europe. They have also been subject to the same fate—they have nearly vanished, although
there are still some groups of artists who support wayang beber in places such as Surakarta (Solo) in
Central Java.[28] Chinese visitors to Java during the 15th century described a storyteller who unrolled
scrolls and told stories that made the audience laugh or cry. A few scrolls of images remain from those
times, found today in museums. There are two sets, hand-painted on hand-made bark cloth, that are still
owned by families who have inherited them from many generations ago, in Pacitan and Wonogiri, both
villages in Central Java. Performances, mostly in small open-sided pavilions or auditoriums, take place
according to the following pattern:

The dalang gives a sign, the small gamelan orchestra with drummer and a few knobbed gongs and a
musician with a rebab (a violin-like instrument held vertically) begins to play, and the dalang unrolls the
first scroll of the story. Then, speaking and singing, he narrates the episode in more detail. In this manner, in
the course of the evening he unrolls several scrolls one at a time. Each scene in the scrolls represents a story
or part of a story. The content of the story typically stems from the Panji romances which are semi-historical
legends set in the 12th–13th century East Javanese kingdoms of Jenggala, Daha and Kediri, and also in
Bali.[29]

                              Some examples of wayang beber scenes
Final fight in alun-alun in Kediri, East Java.
Tawang Alun kills Klana. Indonesia 17th
century




Princess Sekar Taji, mbok Kili (left), and
Ganda Ripa or Panji (right) in the palace in
Kediri, 17th century
Radèn Gunung Sari on horse says goodbye
to his advisers Tratag and Gimeng before
travelling to princess Kumuda Ningrat, 18th
century




Princess Sekar Taji and Panji meet in
Paluhamba market, 17th century
                          Princess Sekar Taji in palace              garden
                          approached by Klana, 17th century




                          Competition between Panji Sepuh (left) and
                          Jaya Puspita (right), 18th century



Wayang wong

Wayang wong, also known as wayang orang (literally 'human wayang'), is a type of Javanese theatrical
performance wherein human characters imitate the movements of a puppet show. The show also integrates
dance by the human characters into the dramatic performance. It typically shows episodes of the Ramayana
or the Mahabharata.[30]

                            Some examples of wayang wong scenes
Pandava and Krishna in a wayang wong
performance




King Duryodana in a wayang wong
performance in Taman Budaya Rahmat Saleh,
Semarang, Jawa Tengah, Indonesia




Giants in a wayang wong performance
                Punokawan in a wayang wong performance




                Rama and Shinta in a wayang wong
                Ramayana Ballet performance




                Opening of wayang wong performance,
                usually showing traditional Javanese dance



Wayang topeng
Wayang topeng or wayang gedog theatrical performances take themes from the Panji cycle of stories from
the kingdom of Janggala. The players wear masks known as wayang topeng or wayang gedog. The word
gedog comes from kedok which, like topeng, means 'mask'.

Wayang gedog centers on a love story about Princess Candra Kirana of Kediri and Raden Panji
Asmarabangun, the legendary crown prince of Janggala. Candra Kirana was the incarnation of Dewi Ratih
(the Hindu goddess of love) and Panji was an incarnation of Kamajaya (the Hindu god of love). Kirana's
story has been given the title Smaradahana ("The fire of love"). At the end of the complicated story they
finally marry and bring forth a son named Raja Putra. Originally, wayang wong was performed only as an
aristocratic entertainment in the palaces of Yogyakarta and Surakarta. In the course of time, it spread to
become a popular and folk form as well.

                           Some examples of wayang topeng scenes




                           Dancing wayang topeng in Malang




                           Studio portrait of wayang topeng actors
Wayang topeng Malang




Wayang topeng in Java
                            Wayang topeng in Java




                            Wayang topeng in Java



Stories
Wayang characters are derived from several groups of stories and settings. The most popular and the most
ancient is wayang purwa, whose story and characters were derived from the Indian Hindu epics the
Ramayana and Mahabharata, set in the ancient kingdoms of Hastinapura, Ayodhya, and Alengkapura
(Lanka). Another group of characters is derived from the Panji cycle, natively developed in Java during the
Kediri Kingdom; these stories are set in the twin Javanese kingdoms of Janggala and Panjalu (Kediri).


Wayang purwa

Wayang purwa (Javanese for 'ancient' or 'original wayang') refer to wayang that are based on the Hindu
epics the Ramayana and Mahabharata. They are usually performed as wayang kulit, wayang golek, and
wayang wong dance dramas.[31]

In Central Java, popular wayang kulit characters include the following (Notopertomo & Jatirahayu
2001):[32]


Satriya              Raja                Dewa                Resi                Abdi
Bima          Arjuna          Sang Hyang     Anoman            Semar
Arjuna        Sasrabahu       Tunggal        Bhisma            Gareng
Dursasana     Rama Wijaya     Sang Hyang     Durna             Petruk
Nakula        Dasamuka        Wenang         Rama              Bagong
Sadewa        Destarata       Batara         Bargawa
              Pandu           Narada                      Raksasa
Antareja
              Dewanata        Batara Guru Putri
Ghatotkaca                                                     Kumbakarna
              Subali and      Dewa Ruci
Antasena                                     Sinta             Sarpakanaka
              Sugriwa         Batara Indra
Abimanyu                                     Kunti             Indrajit
              Barata          Batara Surya
Wisanggeni                                   Drupadi           Megananda
              Baladewa        Batara
Irawan                        Wisnu          Sumbadra          Sukrasana
              Duryudana
Sumantri                      Sang Hyang     Srikandi          Kalabendana
              Kresna
Wibisana                      Nagaraja                         Cakil
              Karna
                              Lembu
              Yudhistira
                              Andini
                              Batara
                              Ganesha

             Wayang purwa figures from Balinese wayang kulit
Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Anggada,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900




Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Jayadrata,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900




Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Kendran,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900
Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Sangruda,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900




Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Duryadana,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900




Wayang kulit (shadow puppet) Gatakaca,
Tropenmuseum collection, Indonesia, before
1900
Wayang panji

Derived from the Panji cycles, natively developed in Java during the Kediri Kingdom, the story set in the
twin Javanese kingdoms of Janggala and Panjalu (Kediri). Its form of expressions are usually performed as
wayang gedog (masked wayang) and wayang wong dance dramas of Java and Bali.

       Raden Panji, alias Panji Asmoro Bangun, alias Panji Kuda Wanengpati, alias Inu Kertapati
       Galuh Chandra Kirana, alias Sekartaji
       Panji Semirang, alias Kuda Narawangsa, the male disguise of Princess Kirana
       Anggraeni


Wayang Menak

Menak is a cycle of wayang puppet plays that feature the
heroic exploits of Wong Agung Jayengrana, who is based on
the 12th-century Muslim literary hero Amir Hamzah. Menak
stories have been performed in the islands of Java and
Lombok in the Indonesian archipelago for several hundred
years. They are predominantly performed in Java as golek, or
wooden rod-puppets, but also can be found on Lombok as
the shadow puppet tradition, wayang sasak.[33] The wayang
golek menak tradition most likely originated along the north
                                                                 Menak Amir Hamzah manuscripts, before
coast of Java under Chinese Muslim influences and spread
                                                                 1792.
East and South and is now most commonly found in the
South Coastal region of Kabumen and Yogyakarta.[34]

The word menak is a Javanese honorific title that is given to people who are recognized at court for their
exemplary character even though they are not nobly born. Jayengrana is just such a character who inspires
allegiance and devotion through his selfless modesty and his devotion to a monotheistic faith called the
"Religion of Abraham." Jayengrana and his numerous followers do battle with the pagan faiths that
threaten their peaceable realm of Koparman. The chief instigator of trouble is Pati Bestak, counselor to
King Nuresewan, who goads pagan kings to capture Jayengrana's wife Dewi Munninggar. The pagan
Kings eventually fail to capture her and either submit to Jayengrana and renounce their pagan faith or die
swiftly in combat.

The literary figure of Amir Hamzah is loosely based on the historic person of Hamza ibn Abdul-Muttalib
who was the paternal uncle of Muhammad. Hamzah was a fierce warrior who fought alongside
Muhammad and died in the battle of Uhud in 624 CE. the literary tradition traveled from Persia to India and
from then on to Southeast Asia where the court poet Yasadipura I (1729-1802) set down the epic in the
Javanese language in the Serat Menak.[35]
[36]The wooden wayang menak is similar in shape to wayang golek; it is most prevalent on the northern
coast of Central Java, especially the Kudus area.

       Wong Agung Jayengrana/Amir Ambyah/Amir Hamzah
       Prabu Nursewan
       Umar Maya
       Umar Madi
Dewi Retna Muninggar
                 Menak figures from Javanese wayang golek




                  Wayang golek menak, Jayengrana, a
                  collection   from     Tropenmuseum, the
                  Netherlands, before 2003




                  Wayang golek menak, Umarmaya, a
                  collection at Tropenmuseum, the Netherlands,
                  before 2003
Wayang golek menak, Umarmadi, a collection
at Tropenmuseum, the Netherlands, before
2003




Wayang golek menak, Jiweng, a collection at
Tropenmuseum, the Netherlands, before 2003
                           Wayang golek menak, Putri Murtinjung, a
                           collection at Tropenmuseum, the Netherlands,
                           before 2003




                           Wayang Golek menak, King Maktal (Albania),
                           a   collection   at   Tropenmuseum,   the
                           Netherlands, before 2003



Wayang Kancil

Wayang kancil is a type of shadow puppet with the main character of kancil and other animal stories taken
from Hitopadeça and Tantri Kamandaka. Wayang kancil was created by Sunan Giri at the end of the 15th
century and is used as a medium for preaching Islam in Gresik.[37] The story of kancil is very popular with
the children, has a humorous element, and can be used as a medium of education because the message
conveyed through the wayang kancil media is very good for children. Wayang kancil is not different from
wayang kulit; wayang kancil is also made from buffalo skin. Even the playing is not much different,
accompanied by a gamelan. The language used by the puppeteer depends on the location of the
performance and the type of audience. If the audience is a child, generally the puppeteer uses Javanese
Ngoko in its entirety, but sometimes Krama Madya and Krama Inggil are inserted in human scenes. The
puppets are carved, painted, drawn realistically, and adapted to the puppet performance. The colors in the
detail of the wayang kancil sunggingan are very interesting and varied. Figures depicted in the form of prey
animals such as tigers, elephants, buffaloes, cows, reptiles, and fowl such as crocodiles, lizards, snakes,
various types of birds, and other animals related to the kancil tale. There are also human figures, including
Pak Tani and Bu Tani, but there are not many human figures narrated. The total number of puppets is only
about 100 pieces per set.

                                      Kancil figures in wayang kulit




                            Kancil




                            Srigala




                            Macan
                Baya




                Keong




                Nenek Petani



Other stories
The historically popular wayang kulit typically is based on the
Hindu epics the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.[38] In the 1960s,
the Christian missionary effort adopted the art form to create
wayang wahyu. The Javanese Jesuit Brother Timotheus L.
Wignyosubroto used the show to communicate to the Javanese and
other Indonesians the teachings of the Bible and of the Catholic
Church in a manner accessible to the audience.[38] Similarly,
wayang sadat has deployed wayang for the religious teachings of
Islam, while wayang pancasila has used it as a medium for national
politics.[38]                                                              Wayang Wahyu

There have also been attempts to retell modern fiction with the art
of wayang, most famously Star Wars as done by Malaysians Tintuoy Chuo and Dalang Pak Dain.[39]

Cultural context
Its initial function, wayang is a ritual intended for ancestral spirits of the hyang belief. Furthermore, wayang
undergoes a shift in role, namely as a medium for social communication. The plays that are performed in
the wayang, usually hold several values, such as education, culture, and teachings of philosophy. Wayang
functions as an effective medium in conveying messages, information, and lessons. Wayang was used as an
effective medium in spreading religions ranging from Hinduism to Islam. Because of the flexibility of
wayang puppets, they still exist today and are used for various purposes. Wayang functions can be grouped
into three, namely:


Tatanan (norms and values)

Wayang is a performance medium that can contain all aspects of human life. Human thoughts, whether
related to ideology, politics, economy, social, culture, law, defense, and security, can be contained in
wayang. In the wayang puppets contain order, namely a norm or convention that contains ethics (moral
philosophy). These norms or conventions are agreed upon and used as guidelines for the mastermind artists.
In the puppet show, there are rules of the game along with the procedures for puppetry and how to play the
puppet, from generation to generation and tradition, over time it becomes something that is agreed upon as
a guideline (convention).

Wayang is an educational medium that focuses on moral and character education. Character education is
something that is urgent and fundamental; character education can form a person who has good
behavior.[40]


Tuntunan (guidelines)

Wayang is a communicative medium in society. Wayang is used as a means of understanding a tradition, an
approach to society, lighting, and disseminating values. Wayang as a medium for character education lies
not only in the elements of the story, the stage, the instruments, and the art of puppetry, but also the
embodiment of values in each wayang character. The embodiment of wayang characters can describe a
person's character. From the puppet one can learn about leadership, courage, determination, honesty, and
sincerity. Apart from that, the puppets can reflect the nature of anger, namely greed, jealousy, envy, cruelty,
and ambition.[40]


Tontonan (entertainment)

Wayang puppet performances are a form of entertainment (tontonan) for the community. Wayang
performances in the form of theatre performances are still very popular especially in the islands of Java and
Bali. Puppet shows are still the favorite of the community and are often included in TV, radio, YouTube,
and other social media. Wayang performances present a variety of arts such as drama, music, dance, literary
arts, and fine arts. Dialogue between characters, narrative expressions (janturan, pocapan, carita), suluk,
kombangan, dhodhogan, and kepyakan are important elements in wayang performances.[40]


Artist

Dalang

The dalang, sometimes referred to as dhalang or kawi
dalang,      is      the     puppeteer     behind     the
performance.  [2][5][41]  It is he who sits behind the
screen, sings and narrates the dialogues of different
characters of the story.[42] With a traditional orchestra
in the background to provide a resonant melody and its
conventional rhythm, the dalang modulates his voice
to create suspense, thus heightening the drama.
Invariably, the play climaxes with the triumph of good
over evil. The dalang is highly respected in Indonesian
culture for his knowledge, art and as a spiritual person     Dalang (puppet master), sindhen (traditional
capable of bringing to life the spiritual stories in the     Javanese singer), and wiyaga (gamelan musicians)
religious epics.[2][5][42]                                   in a wayang kulit show in Java

The figures of the wayang are also present in the
paintings of that time, for example, the roof murals of
the courtroom in Klungkung, Bali. They are still
present in traditional Balinese painting today. The
figures are painted, flat (5 to at most 15 mm — about
half an inch — thick) woodcarvings with movable
arms. The head is solidly attached to the body. Wayang
klitik can be used to perform puppet plays either during
the day or at night. This type of wayang is relatively
rare.

Wayang today is both the most ancient and the most
popular form of puppet theatre in the world. Hundreds
of people will stay up all night long to watch the           The front view of the Wayang Museum seen from
superstar performers, dalang, who command                    Fatahillah Square (Indonesian: Taman Fatahillah)
extravagant fees and are international celebrities. Some of the most famous dalang in recent history are Ki
Nartosabdho, Ki Anom Suroto, Ki Asep Sunandar Sunarya, Ki Sugino, and Ki Manteb Sudarsono.


Sindhen

PasindhènPesindhén or sindhén (from Javanese) is the term for a woman who sings to accompany a
gamelan orchestra, generally as the sole singer. A good singer must have extensive communication skills
and good vocal skills as well as the ability to sing many songs. The title Sinden comes from the word
Pasindhian which means 'rich in songs' or 'who sing the song'. Pesindhen can be interpreted as someone
singing a song. In addition, sinden is also commonly referred to as waranggana which is taken from a
combination of the words wara and anggana. The word wara itself means 'someone who is female' and
anggana which means 'itself'; in ancient times, the waranggana was the only woman in the wayang or
klenengan performance.


Wiyaga

Wiyaga is a term in the musical arts which means a group of people who have special skills playing the
gamelan, especially in accompanying traditional ceremonies and performing arts. Wiyaga is also called
niyaga or nayaga which means 'gamelan musician'.

Wayang Museum
The Wayang Museum is located in the tourist area of the Kota Tua Jakarta (old city) in Jalan Pintu Besar
Utara No.27, Jakarta 11110, Indonesia. The Wayang Museum is adjacent to the Jakarta Historical
Museum.[43]

This museum has various types of Indonesian wayang collections such as wayang kulit, wayang golek,
wayang klithik, wayang suket, wayang beber, and another Indonesian wayang. There is also a collection of
masks (topeng), gamelan, and wayang paintings. The collections are not only from Indonesia, but there are
many collections of puppets from various countries such as Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, Suriname,
China, Vietnam, France, India, Turkey, and many other countries.

Gallery
                                       Wayang Puppet Theater
 Wayang     glass     painting   depiction   of A wayang kulit set and a gamelan ensemble
 Bharatayudha battle.                           collection, Indonesia section at the Musical
                                                Instrument Museum, Phoenix, Arizona, United
                                                States.




    A wayang show in Java, Indonesia, presenting a Wayang golek (3D wooden puppet),
    wayang puppet.                                 Gatot Kaca, Indonesia in 2017.




Sundanese wayang golek A wayang klithik (flat wooden puppet) Wayang kulit (shadow puppet
(3D   wooden  puppet), performance      with    a   gamelan show) accompanied by a gamelan
Indonesia.             orchestra in Ngandong, Java, in ensemble in Java, circa 1870.
                       1918.
           Wayang (shadow puppets) from central Java, a scene from
           Irawan's Wedding, mid-20th century, University of Hawaii Dept. of
           Theater and Dance.




Wayang beber depiction of a battle.                                   Wayang kulit and
                                                                      wayang       golek
                                                                      dalang
                                                                      (puppeteer),    Ki
                                                                      Entus Susmono.
      Wayang golek       performance   in Wayang kulit (leather shadow puppet) Kayon
      Yogyakarta.                         performance.                         (Gunungan
                                                                               ).




                             Wayang makassar



See also
     Theatre portal

     Indonesia portal

  Wayang kulit
  Wayang golek
  Wayang beber
  Culture of Indonesia
  Javanese culture
  Gamelan
  Wayang Museum


References
1. " "Wayang puppet theatre", Inscribed in 2008 (3.COM) on the Representative List of the
   Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (originally proclaimed in 2003)" (http://www.unesco.
   org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00011&RL=00063). UNESCO. Retrieved 10 October
   2014.
2. "Wayang: Indonesian Theatre" (https://www.britannica.com/art/wayang). Encyclopaedia
   Britannica. 2012.
 3. "History and Etymology for Wayang" (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/wayang).
    Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 22 December 2020.
 4. Siyuan Liu (2016). Routledge Handbook of Asian Theatre (https://books.google.com/books?i
    d=H1iFCwAAQBAJ). Routledge. pp. 72–81. ISBN 978-1-317-27886-3.
 5. Don Rubin; Chua Soo Pong; Ravi Chaturvedi; et al. (2001). The World Encyclopedia of
    Contemporary Theatre: Asia/Pacific (https://books.google.com/books?id=maGU4ziPQJQC&
    pg=PA184). Taylor & Francis. pp. 184–186. ISBN 978-0-415-26087-9.
 6. Yves Bonnefoy (1993). Asian Mythologies (https://books.google.com/books?id=r4I-FsZCzJE
    C&pg=PA162). University of Chicago Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-226-06456-7.
 7. " "Pertunjukan Wayang Kulit sebagai Atraksi Budaya Baik atau Buruk?" " (https://www.komp
    asiana.com/arullasinta/5df50b37d541df67744da452/pertunjukan-wayang-kulit-sebagai-atra
    ksi-budaya-baik-atau-buruk?page=all). www.kompasiana.com. 15 December 2019.
    Retrieved 13 February 2021.
 8. " "Dalang Ruwat, Profesi Tak Sembarangan Ki Manteb Soedharsono" " (https://www.cnnindo
    nesia.com/hiburan/20191129153730-241-452708/dalang-ruwat-profesi-tak-sembarangan-ki
    -manteb-soedharsono). www.cnnindonesia.com. Retrieved 13 February 2021.
 9. " "Sedekah Bumi dan Wayang Kulit, Cara Bersyukur Petani Atas Panennya" " (https://www.j
    awapos.com/jpg-today/10/10/2018/sedekah-bumi-dan-wayang-kulit-cara-bersyukur-petani-a
    tas-panennya/). www.jawapos.com. 10 October 2018. Retrieved 13 February 2021.
10. " "Wayang Seni Ritual, Dulu Dimainkan Oleh Saman" " (https://balihbalihan.com/2020/06/1
    3/wayang-seni-ritual-dulu-dimainkan-oleh-saman/#:~:text=Seni%20pertunjukan%20wayan
    g%20tidak%20hanya,selalu%20hadir%20sebagai%20pemuput%20karya.).
    www.balihbalihan.com. 12 June 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2021.
11. " "Wayang: Aset Budaya Nasional Sebagai Refleksi Kehidupan dengan Kandungan Nilai-
    nilai Falsafah Timur" " (https://jendela.kemdikbud.go.id/v2/kebudayaan/detail/wayang-aset-b
    udaya-nasional-sebagai-refleksi-kehidupan-dengan-kandungan-nilai-nilai-falsafah-timur#:~:
    text=Wayang%20merupakan%20salah%20satu%20puncak,antara%20banyak%20karya%2
    0budaya%20lainnya.&text=Wayang%20terus%20berkembang%20dari%20zaman,%2C%20
    pemahaman%20filsafat%2C%20serta%20hiburan.). Indonesian Ministry of Education and
    Culture (Kemdikbud). Retrieved 8 January 2021.
12. " "Wayang puppet theatre", Inscribed in 2008 (3.COM) on the Representative List of the
    Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (originally proclaimed in 2003)" (http://www.unesco.
    org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00011&RL=00063). UNESCO. Retrieved 10 October
    2014.
13. Mair, Victor H. Painting and Performance: Picture Recitation and Its Indian Genesis.
    Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1988. p. 58.
14. James R. Brandon (2009). Theatre in Southeast Asia (https://books.google.com/books?id=g-
    tAlBV5_LkC). Harvard University Press. pp. 143–145, 352–353. ISBN 978-0-674-02874-6.
15. " "Wayang puppet theatre", Inscribed in 2008 (3.COM) on the Representative List of the
    Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (originally proclaimed in 2003)" (http://www.unesco.
    org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00011&RL=00063). UNESCO. Retrieved 10 October
    2014.
16. James R. Brandon (2009). Theatre in Southeast Asia (https://books.google.com/books?id=g-
    tAlBV5_LkC). Harvard University Press. pp. 42–44, 65, 92–94, 278. ISBN 978-0-674-02874-
    6.
17. Miyao, J. (1977). "P. L. Amin Sweeney and Akira Goto (ed.) An International Seminar on the
    Shadow Plays of Asia" (https://doi.org/10.5512%2Fsea.1977.142). Southeast Asia: History
    and Culture. Japan Society for Southeast Asian Studies. 1977 (7): 142–146.
    doi:10.5512/sea.1977.142 (https://doi.org/10.5512%2Fsea.1977.142).
18. Kathy Foley (2016). Siyuan Liu (ed.). Routledge Handbook of Asian Theatre (https://books.g
    oogle.com/books?id=H1iFCwAAQBAJ). Routledge. pp. 181–182. ISBN 978-1-317-27886-3.
19. Kathy Foley (2016). Siyuan Liu (ed.). Routledge Handbook of Asian Theatre (https://books.g
    oogle.com/books?id=H1iFCwAAQBAJ). Routledge. pp. 182–184. ISBN 978-1-317-27886-3.
20. Varadpande, Manohar Laxman (1987). History of Indian Theatre, Volume 1 (https://books.go
    ogle.com/books?id=SyxOHOCVcVkC&pg=PA75). New Delhi: Abhinav Publications. p. 75.
    ISBN 9788170172215.
21. "Keragaman Wayang Indonesia" (https://indonesia.go.id/ragam/seni/seni/keragaman-wayan
    g-indonesia). indonesia.go.id. Retrieved 12 December 2020.
22. Drs. R. Soekmono (1973). Pengantar Sejarah Kebudayaan Indonesia 2, 2nd ed. 5th reprint
    edition in 1988. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Kanisius. p. 56.
23. "Cerita Panji, Pusaka Budaya Nusantara yang tidak Habis Digali" (https://mediaindonesia.c
    om/weekend/293393/cerita-panji-pusaka-budaya-nusantara-yang-tidak-habis-digali).
    www.mediaindonesia.com. Retrieved 13 February 2021.
24. Sumarsam (15 December 1995). Gamelan: Cultural Interaction and Musical Development in
    Central Java (https://archive.org/details/gamelan00suma_0). University of Chicago Press.
    p. 30 (https://archive.org/details/gamelan00suma_0/page/30). ISBN 978-0-226-78011-5.
    Retrieved 19 June 2012.
25. Eckersley. M. (ed.) 2009. Drama from the Rim: Asian Pacific Drama Book. Drama Victoria.
    Melbourne. 2009. (p. 15)
26. Simon Sudarman, 'Sagio: Striving to preserve wayang' (http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/
    2012/09/11/striving-preserve-wayang.html), The Jakarta Post, 11 September 2012.
27. Ganug Nugroho Adil, "Joko Sri Yono: Preserving 'wayang beber'" (http://www.thejakartapost.
    com/news/2012/03/27/joko-sri-yono-preserving-wayang-beber.html), The Jakarta Post, 27
    March 2012.
28. Ganug Nugroho Adil, 'The metamorphosis of "Wayang Beber"' (http://www.thejakartapost.co
    m/news/2013/04/19/the-metamorphosis-wayang-beber.html), The Jakarta Post, 19 April
    2013.
29. Ganug Nugroho Adil, "Sinhanto: A wayang master craftsman" (http://www.thejakartapost.co
    m/news/2012/06/22/sihhanto-a-wayang-master-craftsman.html), The Jakarta Post, 22 June
    2012.
30. James R. Brandon (2009). Theatre in Southeast Asia (https://books.google.com/books?id=g-
    tAlBV5_LkC). Harvard University Press. pp. 46–54, 143–144, 150–152. ISBN 978-0-674-
    02874-6.
31. Inna Solomonik. "Wayang Purwa Puppets: The Language of the Silhouette", Bijdragen tot
    de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 136 (1980), no: 4, Leiden, pp. 482–497.
32. Notopertomo, Margono; Warih Jatirahayu. 2001. 51 Karakter Tokoh Wayang Populer (https://
    books.google.com/books/about/51_karakter_tokoh_wayang_populer.html). Klaten,
    Indonesia: Hafamina. ISBN 979-26-7496-9
33. Petersen, Robert S. "The Island in the Middle: The Domains of Wayang Golek Menak, The
    Rod Puppetry of Central Java. In Theatre Survey 34.2.
34. Sindhu Jotaryono. The Traitor Jobin: A Wayang Golek Performance from Central Java.
    Translated by Daniel Mc Guire and Lukman Aris with an introduction by Robert S. Petersen.
    Ed. Joan Suyenaga. Jakarta, Lontar Foundation, 1999.
35. Pigeaud, Th. G. "The Romance of Amir Hamzah in Java." In Binkisan Budi: Een Bundel
    Opstellen Voor P. S. Van Ronkel: A. W. Sijthoff's Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V., Leiden, 1950.
36. "Amir Hamzah, uncle of the Prophet Muhammad, spreader of Islam, and hero of the Serat
    Menak" (http://education.asianart.org/explore-resources/artwork/amir-hamzah-uncle-prophet
    -muhammad-spreader-islam-and-hero-serat-menak). Asian Art Education.
37. " "Wayang Kancil, Seni Pertunjukan" " (http://encyclopedia.jakarta-tourism.go.id/post/wayan
    g-kancil--seni-pertunjukan?lang=id). jakarta-tourism. Retrieved 6 January 2021.
38. Poplawska, Marzanna (2004). "Wayang Wahyu as an Example of Christian Forms of
    Shadow Theatre". Asian Theatre Journal. Johns Hopkins University Press. 21 (2): 194–202.
    doi:10.1353/atj.2004.0024 (https://doi.org/10.1353%2Fatj.2004.0024). S2CID 144932653 (ht
    tps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:144932653).
39. Sharmilla Ganesan (12 September 2017). "Everything old is new again" (https://www.pressr
    eader.com/malaysia/the-star-malaysia-star2/20170912/281608125594564). The Star.
    Retrieved 7 January 2021.
40. "Pengertian Wayang, Fungsi, Kandungan dan Jenis-Jenis Wayang Lengkap" (https://www.p
    elajaran.co.id/2018/04/pengertian-wayang-fungsi-kandungan-dan-jenis-jenis-wayang-lengk
    ap.html). pelajaran.co.id. Retrieved 20 January 2021.
41. Sedana, I Nyoman; Foley, Kathy (1993). "The Education of a Balinese Dalang". Asian
    Theatre Journal. University of Hawaii Press. 10 (1): 81–100. doi:10.2307/1124218 (https://do
    i.org/10.2307%2F1124218). JSTOR 1124218 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1124218).
42. Siyuan Liu (2016). Routledge Handbook of Asian Theatre (https://books.google.com/books?i
    d=H1iFCwAAQBAJ). Routledge. pp. 166, 175 note 2, 76–78. ISBN 978-1-317-27886-3.
43. " "Museum Wayang Jakarta" " (https://www.museumjakarta.com/museum-wayang-jakarta/).
    Museum Jakarta. Retrieved 20 January 2021.

   Signell, Karl. Shadow Music of Java. 1996 Rounder Records CD #5060, Cambridge MA.
   This article was initially translated from the German-language Wikipedia article.
   Poplawska, Marzanna. Asian Theatre Journal. Fall 2004, Vol. 21, p. 194–202.


Further reading
   Alton L. Becker (1979). "Text-Building, Epistemology, and Aesthetics in the Javanese
   Shadow Theatre". In Aram Yengoyan and Alton L. Becker (ed.). The Imagination of Reality:
   Essays in Southeast Asian Coherence Systems. Norwood, NJ: ABLEX.

   Brandon, James (1970). On Thrones of Gold — Three Javanese Shadow Plays. Harvard.
   Ghulam-Sarwar Yousof (1994). Dictionary of Traditional South-East Asian Theatre. Oxford
   University Press.
   Clara van Groenendael, Victoria (1985). The Dalang Behind the Wayang. Dordrecht, Foris.
   Keeler, Ward (1987). Javanese Shadow Plays, Javanese Selves. Princeton University
   Press.
   Keeler, Ward (1992). Javanese Shadow Puppets. OUP.
   Long, Roger (1982). Javanese shadow theatre: Movement and characterization in
   Ngayogyakarta wayang kulit. Umi Research Press.
   Mellema, R.L. (1988). Wayang Puppets: Carving, Colouring, Symbolism. Amsterdam, Royal
   Tropical Institute, Bulletin 315.
   Mudjanattistomo (1976). Pedhalangan Ngayogyakarta. Yogyakarta (in Javanese).
   Signell, Karl (1996). Shadow Music of Java. CD booklet. Rounder Records CD 5060.
   Soedarsono (1984). Wayang Wong. Yogyakarta, Gadjah Mada University Press.


External links
   Historical Development of Puppetry: Scenic Shades (includes information about wayang
   beber, kulit, klitik and golek) (http://pages.citenet.net/users/ctmw2400/)
    Seleh Notes article on identifying Central Javanese wayang kulit (https://web.archive.org/we
    b/20070703061208/http://www.gamelannetwork.co.uk/seleh-notes-library/wayang-puppets.h
    tml)
    Wayang Orang (wayang wong) traditional dance, from Indonesia Tourism (https://web.archiv
    e.org/web/20041104025934/http://www.indonesiatourism.go.id/gallery/traddance.htm)
    Wayang Klitik: a permanent exhibit of Puppetry Arts Museum (http://www.puppet.org/museu
    m/permanent.shtml#Wayang)
    Wayang Golek Photo Gallery, includes description, history and photographs of individual
    puppets by Walter O. Koenig (http://www.pbase.com/amoxtli/wayang_golek)
    Wayang Kulit: The Art form of the Balinese Shadow Play (http://www.shadowlight.org/slp/ind
    ex.cfm?fuseaction=Resources.DisplayText&resource_id=6) by Lisa Gold
    Wayang Puppet Theatre (https://web.archive.org/web/20060108112008/http://www.unesco.o
    r.id/activities/culture/programme/259.php) on the Indonesian site of UNESCO
    The Wayang Golek Wooden Stick Puppets of Java, Indonesia (http://www.marlamallett.com/
    puppets.htm) (commercial site)
    An overview of the Shadow Puppets tradition (with many pictures) in a site to Discover
    Indonesia (https://web.archive.org/web/20051213222640/http://discover-indo.tierranet.com/
    wayang.htm)
    Wayang Kulit exhibition at the Museum of International Folk Art (https://web.archive.org/web/
    20090429070314/http://www.internationalfolkart.org/exhibitions/dancingshadows.html)
    Wayang Kulit Collection of Shadow Puppets, Simon Fraser University Museum of
    Archaeology & Ethnology digitized on Multicultural Canada website (https://web.archive.org/
    web/20100426062829/http://www.multiculturalcanada.ca/wkcsp)
    Contemporary Wayang Archive, by the National University of Singapore (http://cwa-web.org/
    cwa)
    Wayang Kontemporer, an interactive PhD dissertation on Contemporary Wayang Archive (htt
    p://cwa-web.org/dissertation/wayang-dis/)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wayang&oldid=1148258647"
